OPS-61 DN Initial (#43)
vatnz-dev/sops: docs/aerodromes/Class-D/nzdn.md

| Dunedin ADC    | TDN        | Dunedin Tower   | 120.700     | NZDN_TWR       | Primary    |

## Airspace

The Dunedin CTR/D follows the inner lateral boundries shown below from `SFC` to `A035`. The CTR/D is comprised of three sectors - West, East and Instrument. The Dunedin CTA/D follows the outer lateral boundary as shown below. To the North, South and East, the airspace is from `A035` to `A095`. To the West the airspace is from `A045` to `A095` then `A075` to `A135` as seen in the diagram below.

<figure markdown>
  ![Dunedin Control Zone](./assets/nzdn-airspace.png) 
  <figcaption>Dunedin Control Zone (CTR/D) and Control Area (CTA/D)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Layout and Areas of Responsibility

Dunedin's main apron has five stands, two of those with jetways. Taxiway `C` leads to the Mainland Air and Flightline Aviation hangars operating flight training and charter services. The areas of responsibility are as depicted below.

<figure markdown>
  ![Dunedin Areas of Responsibility](./assets/nzdn-resp.png) 
  <figcaption>Dunedin Areas of Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

# Pushback and Taxi

> Pushback and startup clearence from stand one to five is managed by TDN. Controllers can make use of a "tail-facing" instruction to manage direction of pushback. Aircraft on taxiway `C` must contact TDN at `C2` holding point before proceeding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pushback and startup clearance from stand one to five is managed by Tower. Controllers can make use of a "tail-facing" instruction to manage direction of pushback. Aircraft on taxiway `C` must contact Tower at `C2` holding point before proceeding.
```

> An aircraft may be taxiied to the holding point, traffic permitting the aircraft may be given backtrack as apart of the taxi clearance and also traffic permitting the controller may choose to omit the taxiway. Aircraft may advise the controller they are able to accept an intersection departure, therefore they may be taxiied to the holding point, omiting the backtrack instruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An aircraft may be taxiied to the holding point and, traffic permitting the aircraft may be given backtrack as apart of the taxi clearance. Traffic permitting, the controller may also choose to omit the taxiway. Aircraft may advise the controller they are able to accept an intersection departure, therefore they may be taxiied to the holding point, omiting the backtrack instruction.
```

| 03     | `BIDEL #P` | Cat A to D             | **Preferred departure for northern-bound aircraft via `BIDEL`.**                                                                          |
| 03     | `BIDEL #R` | Cat A to D             | More track miles to `BIDEL`, can be issued in the event of consecutive departures via `BIDEL`.                                            |
| 03     | `BASOS #P` | Cat A to D             | **Preferred departure for `QN` and western-bound international traffic.**                                                                 |
| 03     | `AKPIN #P` | Cat A to D             | **Preferred departure for `NV` traffic.**                                                                                                 |
| 03     | `SOUTH #`  | Cat A to D             | To `OREXI` and `PORUT`. Non-RNAV.                                                                                                         |
| 03     | `SW #`     | Cat A to D             | To `BIDEL`, `MEGUG` `MIPAK`, `PORUT` and `QN`. Non-RNAV.                                                                                  |

## Visual Departures

> When either runway is in use, TDN may issue northern-bound aircraft a visual departure direct to `BIDEL` on pilot's request, traffic permitting. Alternatively, when Runway 21 is in use, TDN may issue northern-bound aircraft on the `BIDEL #Q`or `BIDEL #S` a visual departure to `ATGUB` or `IDLIK` on pilot's request ([Refer to AIP chart for `BIDEL #Q` and `BIDEL #S`](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Dunedin-NZDN/NZDN_62.7_62.8.pdf)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When either runway is in use, Tower may issue northern-bound aircraft a visual departure direct to `BIDEL` on pilot's request, traffic permitting. Alternatively, when Runway 21 is in use, Tower may issue northern-bound aircraft on the `BIDEL #Q`or `BIDEL #S` a visual departure to `ATGUB` or `IDLIK` on pilot's request ([Refer to AIP chart for `BIDEL #Q` and `BIDEL #S`](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Dunedin-NZDN/NZDN_62.7_62.8.pdf)).
```

!!! example "Visual Departure Direct to `BIDEL`"
    **Dunedin Tower**: *"ANZ676, recleared visual deaprture direct `BIDEL`."*

!!! example "Runway 21 Visual Departure"
    **Dunedin Tower**: *"ANZ758M, recleared left visual deaprture direct `ATGUB` to rejoin the SID."*

# Arrivals
STH shall issue STARs to arrivals without coordination with TDN. The `MIPAK #C` arrival for runway 03 may be used when requested by the pilot. TDN may choose to coordinate with STH or amend the arrival on first contact.

## Runway 21
All arrivals terminate at `ESKAT`, which is the IAF for the RNAV and ILS approach. 

### Missed Approach
In the event of a missed approach, aicraft should be instructed to carry out the published missed approach procedure. For the ILS and NDB procedures, this will take the aircraft straight out to `BE` NDB holding at `A040`. For the RNAV procedure, it will take the aircraft straight out to `AKLAR` holding at `A040`. The aircraft can then be issued the approprite arrival procedure from `AKLAR` to commence the approach again.

## Runway 03
All arrivals terminate at `AKLAR`, which is the IAF for the RNAV and ILS approach.

### Missed Approach

> In the event of a missed approach, aicraft should be instructed to carry out the published missed approach procedure. For the ILS and NDB procedures, this will take the aircraft straight out to `MI` NDB, then a right turn to `BE` NDB holding at `A040`. For the RNAV procedure, it will take the aircraft to `DABCA` holding at `A040`. The aircraft can then be issued the approprite arrival procedure from `DABCA` to commence the approach again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event of a missed approach, aircraft should be instructed to carry out the published missed approach procedure. For the ILS and NDB procedures, this will take the aircraft straight out to `MI` NDB, then a right turn to `BE` NDB holding at `A040`. For the RNAV procedure, it will take the aircraft to `DABCA` holding at `A040`. The aircraft can then be issued the appropriate arrival procedure from `DABCA` to commence the approach again.
```

## VFR Procedures

### Arrivals
In order to lessen the amount of instructions given to VFR traffic, the Controller shall issue a published VFR arrival where possible. Once the Pilot reports overhead the respective VRP, TDN shall issue circuit joining insturctions. [Refer to AIP chart for NZDN arrivals](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Dunedin-NZDN/NZDN_35.1_35.2.pdf){ target=new }.

### Departures
In order to lessen the amount of instructions given to VFR traffic, the Controller shall issue one of the VFR Departure Procedures where possible, otherwise a more plain language clearance will be issued. [Refer to AIP chart for NZDN departures](https://www.aip.net.nz/assets/AIP/Aerodrome-Charts/Dunedin-NZDN/NZDN_64.1_64.2.pdf){ target=new }.

## NZTI - Taieri

> Taieri is a small, uncontrolled GA aerodrome located 8nm Northeast of NZDN (Dunedin). Aircraft may operate within the TI circuit and within 3nm of the aerodrome below `A011` without reference to ATC. Aircraft departing TI shall recieve clearence and departure instructions from TDN prior to departure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taieri is a small, uncontrolled GA aerodrome located 8nm Northeast of NZDN (Dunedin). Aircraft may operate within the TI circuit and within 3nm of the aerodrome below `A011` without reference to ATC. Aircraft departing TI shall receive clearance and departure instructions from TDN prior to departure.
```
